Initial upload (#2)
CU-DBMI/redirects: README.md

You can do this [directly on github.com](../../edit/main/redirects.yaml) (tip: press <kbd>.</kbd> right now), or locally with git.

## Motivation

You've likely heard of a service called [Bitly](https://bitly.com/).
It allows you to convert a long link like `some-website.com/a-long-url?search=a-bunch-of-characters` into a shorter one like `bit.ly/98K8eH`.
When someone visits the shorter link, Bitly automatically "redirects" them to the longer one.
You can think of it like a shortcut.

Bitly also offers several other features that you probably want:

- You can customize the text after the `/`, giving you a url that a human could actually remember and type in manually, like `bit.ly/MyCoolLink` (they call these "back-halves").
- You can set up a custom domain to brand your links the way you want, giving you an even nicer and easier-to-use link, like `my-website.com/MyCoolLink`.
- You can see how many and what kinds of people have used the link over time (i.e. analytics).

This all sounds great, so what's the problem?

> Well namely: _Bitly [hides or limits a lot of this functionality behind a paywall](https://bitly.com/pages/pricing)_, and their free plan has become more and more limited over time.

Reviewer: After reading this section I felt that Bitly might be solely blamed for a larger issue with all url-shortener businesses. Providing the barebones suggestion below to help broaden this statement. Tying in other examples within the readme may also make the content more understandable or searchable for someone who may not use Bitly. 

```suggestion
Well namely: URL shorteners like Bitly  _[hide or limit a lot of functionality behind paywalls](https://bitly.com/pages/pricing)_, and their free plans are sometimes changed to be more limiting.
```

Author: In my research, I found Bitly free plan to be the most limited by a significant margin (maybe others would have different findings). That, and the fact that they are the biggest name, made me single them out.

I also have a sentence about other competing services below that which I've tweaked the wording of to hopefully make it more fair/clear.

Author: Actually I'm rewriting this section to list Bitly and some of its alternatives right at the start, and mention things more generally afterward.

> Well namely: _Bitly [hides or limits a lot of this functionality behind a paywall](https://bitly.com/pages/pricing)_, and their free plan has become more and more limited over time.

Author: > For example, bitly charges over $40,000 per year for the feature of changing the destination link.

I would like to avoid including specific figures that are going to change frequently. However, I am going to emphasize that Bitly is quite expensive.

> And with Bitly, each person has their own account, so unless you share passwords (eww), it is difficult for teams to collaborate on a single set of redirection links.

Is there really no concept of a "team" on Bitly where multiple accounts can edit the same set of links? I want to be careful to not make untrue claims about these services.

> Well namely: _Bitly [hides or limits a lot of this functionality behind a paywall](https://bitly.com/pages/pricing)_, and their free plan has become more and more limited over time.

Author: I am linking to Bitly's pricing page, yes.

So it looks like they do have "teams" but only with the enterprise plan, yeah:

> ENTERPRISE
Drive brand loyalty, scale multichannel initiatives and collaborate across teams with a solution tailored to your needs.
Get a Quote
10,000+ branded links/mo.
Everything in Premium, plus:
Multiple user seats and group permissions

I'll word it carefully to reflect this.

This may not be a problem for you, especially if you value the convenience of having a simple service that handles everything automatically.
And there are certainly [other services that compete with Bitly](https://zapier.com/blog/best-url-shorteners/) which may offer you what you want for free (for now).

But with just a little bit of setup, we can accomplish all of this in a much better way.
Well, at least much better-suited to the _target audience of this approach_: **People/organizations who use GitHub and Git**.

## Comparison

Here's how this approach compares to Bitly and similar services.

**The benefits**:

- Free(er)!
  You only need to pay for a custom domain name, if you want.

> - Not subject to the pricing whims of large companies.

Reviewer: Would the reader still be at the whim of Microsoft via Github's pricing constraints? If so, should we call this out?

Author: I think GitHub Pages pricing has been the same for as long as I've known about it, whereas these url services seem to change their tiers all the time.

I'll change it to "pricing whims of the url shortening services".

Author: GitHub Pages has been free since the creation of GitHub in 2008:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_GitHub

So I feel confident not calling it out specifically, and sticking with "pricing and features _should_ remain the same".

Reviewer: @vincerubinetti - thanks, I noticed the update here; it feels more clear now, appreciate it.

  Features and cost shouldn't change.

> - Uses tools and workflows you're already accustomed to and ideally prefer.

Reviewer: Recommend increasing the specificity of this statement.

```suggestion
- Uses tools and workflows familiar to those with Github access.
```

Author: Adding a parenthetical reference to the target audience above. A lot of the readme makes the assumption that the reader is a git/GitHub person.

- You have to pay if you want a custom domain.
- People can't use web searches to find private info like Zoom room urls.

**The downsides**:

- More setup.
- Your redirect lists are not truly 100% hidden from the public[^1].
- Editing YAML is slightly harder than typing in textboxes, so you could accidentally break the formatting.
- If things go wrong, you have to troubleshoot it yourself or ask for help.

## How it works

You have a private _redirects_ GitHub repository that contains your redirect lists as [`.yaml`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML) files.
This is where you specify where you want to redirect from and to.
You choose who can see or edit these lists using GitHub's permission settings.

You also have a public _website_ GitHub repository that hosts a barebones [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/) website.
This is what actually performs the redirecting when a user visits a link.
You can set this website up at a custom domain to make your links shorter and nicer.

After the one-time setup, **all you have to do is edit the `.yaml` files, and everything else updates automatically**, within a minute or so.

<p align="center">

>   <img height="300" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8326331/197588654-48f065e5-ca42-4ebc-93b0-7096a402ec18.jpg?raw=true" alt="Diagram of this approach. Explained in text form below.">

Reviewer: Great diagram, helpful! Minor thing: would it make sense to change the title of the top right box to "your-org/redirects" instead of "your-org/redirects-repo" for preciseness? I think a similar change might be possible with "website-repo".

Author: I am torn on this. I named and worded things very carefully and consistently in this readme. I wanted to refer to the repos as two distinct names in the readme: _redirects repo_ and _website repo_. I believe I consistently refer to them as such, with the sole exception of the actual repo names themselves. For the repo names, I wanted to call it `redirects-website` instead of just `website` to make sure it was clear that the two repos were related just from their titles.

One solution could be to change all the mentions of _website repo_ to _redirects website repo_, but I feel that that makes it harder to read and makes it easier to confuse the two when reading the readme.

Author: Or I could change the diagram to just say e.g. "website repo" instead of `your-org/website-repo`? To make it clear that it's the "human"/colloquial name of the repo rather than the exact actual name of the repo.

3. The `encode.js` script combines all of your top-folder `.yaml` files into one, and encodes it into a format that isn't searchable or human-readable[^1].
4. `deploy.yaml` then tells GitHub to take the result of the `encode.js` script and commit it to the `redirect.js` script in the _website repo_.
5. In the _website repo_, GitHub Pages detects a change in the `redirect.js` script, and updates the website.

Then, a user visiting a link goes like this:

1. They navigate to a link on the website, e.g. `/chatroom`.
2. `chatroom.html` isn't a file in the _website repo_, and thus isn't a page on the website, so GitHub loads `404.html` for the user instead (but preserves the `/chatroom` url).
   This file immediately runs some scripts.
3. The analytics code snippet sends[^2] stats like url, IP, time, etc. off to Google Analytics or whoever.
4. The `redirect.js` script decodes the redirect lists previously encoded from the _redirects repo_, finds the long url corresponding to "chatroom", and navigates there instead.
5. They arrive at the intended destination, e.g. `zoom.us/j/12345abcdef`, with virtually no perceptible delay.

> ## Setup

Reviewer: Amazing setup notes!

# Url Redirects with GitHub

_Counterpart to the [redirects-website repo](../../../redirects-website)._

✏️ [How to edit](#how-to-edit)  
💡 [Motivation](#motivation)  
✔️ [Comparison](#comparison)  
🧠 [How it works](#how-it-works)  
⚙️ [Setup](#setup)

## How to edit

1. Add/change/remove redirect entries in one or more [`.yaml` files in the top folder](../../blob/main/redirects.yaml).
2. Commit the changes to the `main` branch.
3. Changes should take effect automatically within a minute or so.
   Verify that no errors occurred in the automatic process here: [![Encode and deploy](../../actions/workflows/deploy.yaml/badge.svg)](../../actions/workflows/deploy.yaml)

You can do this [directly on github.com](../../edit/main/redirects.yaml) (tip: press <kbd>.</kbd> right now), or locally with git.

## Motivation

You've likely heard of services like [Bitly](https://bitly.com/), [TinyURL](https://tinyurl.com/), [Rebrandly](https://www.rebrandly.com/), and [others](https://zapier.com/blog/best-url-shorteners/).
They allow you to convert a long link like `some-website.com/a-long-url?search=a-bunch-of-characters` into a shorter one like `bit.ly/98K8eH`.

> When someone visits the shorter link, the service automatically "redirect" them to the longer one.

Reviewer 2: Typo, changed "redirect" to "redirects".
```suggestion
When someone visits the shorter link, the service automatically "redirects" them to the longer one.
```

You can think of it like a shortcut.

These services usually offer several other features that you probably want too:

- You can customize the text after the `/`, giving you a url that a human could actually remember and type in manually, like `bit.ly/MyCoolLink` (some call these "back-halves").
- You can set up a custom domain to brand your links the way you want, giving you an even nicer and easier-to-use link, like `my-website.com/MyCoolLink`.
- You can see how many and what kinds of people have used the link over time (i.e. analytics).

This all sounds great, so what's the problem?

> Well namely: **They hide or limit a lot of this functionality behind a paywall.**

Reviewer 2: Grammar tweaks; "well" is a clause, so it should have a comma afterward, and ":" doesn't begin a sentence, so what follows should still be in lowercase.
```suggestion
Well, namely: **they hide or limit a lot of this functionality behind a paywall.**
```

Bitly, the de facto standard, [is especially quite expensive](https://bitly.com/pages/pricing).
While you may be able to find one that gives you most or all of what you want for free right now, free plans have generally become more and more limited over time.

Paying for a plan may not be a problem for you, especially if you value the convenience of having a simple service that handles everything automatically.
But with just a little bit of setup, we can accomplish all of this in a much better way.

> Well, at least much better-suited to the _target audience of this approach_: **People/organizations who use GitHub and Git**.

Reviewer 2: Same grammar tweak as above regarding capitalization after a colon.
```suggestion
Well, at least much better-suited to the _target audience of this approach_: **people/organizations who use GitHub and Git**.
```

In summary:

1. Purchase a domain name from a reputable service.
2. Point your domain name provider to GitHub Pages using an `A` record.
   This is slightly different for each company; they should have their own instructions on how to do it.
3. Set the custom domain field in the "Pages" settings of the _website repo_ (automatically creates a `CNAME` file in the repo).
4. GitHub should tell you that your site is now being hosted at e.g. `your-domain.com`.

### Add notes

These aren't always necessary or desired, but may help the users and editors of your links.

- In your _redirects repo_, add a big warning to the top of the readme like "_Do not share links here without permission 🔒_", so that people who have access understand that it's privileged info.
- In your _website repo_, add an `index.html` page with some filler content like "_This website just performs redirects for [YOUR ORG]_", in case people go to the root of the website with no e.g. `/some-link`.
- In your _website repo_, add a big link to the top of the readme to remind people where your website is hosted, e.g. `your-domain.com` or `your-org.github.io/repo-name`.

### Existing site

> If you already have an existing website being hosted with GitHub Pages that you want to incorporate this approach into:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you already have a website being hosted with GitHub Pages into which you want to incorporate this approach:
```

1. Skip forking the _website repo_.
2. Copy the [`redirect.js` script](https://github.com/CU-DBMI/redirects-website/blob/main/redirect.js) into the **top folder** of your existing website repo.
3. [Include it](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Introduction_to_HTML/The_head_metadata_in_HTML#applying_css_and_javascript_to_html) at the top of your 404 page `<head>`, after your analytics script(s) but before anything else (so the redirection happens immediately).

If your existing website is built and hosted in a different way, this approach would require modification[^3] and might not be appropriate for you.

> [^1]: This approach does not _encrypt_ your redirect list, it only _obfuscates_ it. Anyone with some coding knowledge could still figure out all of your redirect lists with some effort. The way this method works, true encryption is impossible because any key needed for decryption would also need to be in the `redirect.js` script, which the attacker would have access to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[^1]: This approach does not _encrypt_ your redirect list, it only _obfuscates_ it. Anyone with some coding knowledge could still figure out all of your redirect lists with some effort. Because of the way this method works true encryption is impossible, because any key needed for decryption would also need to be in the `redirect.js` script, to which the attacker would have access.
```

After the one-time setup, **all you have to do is edit the `.yaml` files, and everything else updates automatically**, within a minute or so.

<p align="center">

>   <img height="300" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8326331/197649364-90e041a9-397f-4242-b27a-2889793b6dcd.jpg?raw=true" alt="Diagram of this approach. Explained in text form below.">

Reviewer: The titling here read more clearly to me, appreciate your changes!
